Move java sdk configuration documentation into docs site (#4377)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/languages/java/automatic/configuration.md

weight: 10
aliases: [agent-config]
# prettier-ignore
cSpell:ignore: akka armeria authservice classloaders couchbase Customizer datasource dbcp Dotel dropwizard dubbo enduser finatra hikari hikaricp HSET httpasyncclient httpclient hystrix jaxrs jaxws jedis jodd kotlinx logback logmanager LOWMEMORY mojarra myfaces myservice okhttp oshi ottrace pekko PKCS rabbitmq ratpack rediscala redisson restlet retryable rocketmq serverlessapis spymemcached twilio vaadin vertx vibur webflux webmvc
---

> ## SDK Autoconfiguration

Reviewer: Its a bit strange that the SDK autoconfiguration section is nested under "Language APIs & SDKs -> Java -> Automatic", where automatic is a page focussed on the otel java agent. SDK autoconfiguration is used within the otel java agent, but can also be used independently, and we actively encourage that.

Is it crazy to have a dedicated page on SDK configuration?

Author: And now there is no longer an `Automatic` section (since  https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/4430) and instead this now lives in a new location, `Zero-code Instrumentation -> Java -> Agent -> Configuration`

As a user trying to configure the SDK, i'm not sure it would be obvious to me to look there to try and find the configuration options.

Looking at some other languages, I don't see too much of a common pattern for where the language specific SDK configuration lives.

* `.NET` uses the structure that java used to adhere to 
	* `.NET -> Automatic -> Configuration` ([link](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/net/automatic/configuration/))
* `Python` uses the the structure that java used to adhere to 
	* `Python -> Automatic -> Configuration` ([link](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/python/automatic/configuration/))
* `Swift` has an "SDK Configuration" section on their instrumentation page
	* `Swift -> Instrumentation` ([link](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/swift/instrumentation/#sdk-configuration))
* `PHP` has a page for the SDK with the configs
	* `PHP -> SDK` ([link](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/php/sdk/#configuration))
* `C++` doesn't have their SDK documentation within the doc site, but instead [they link out](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/cpp/instrumentation/#further-reading-1)
* `Erlang`, `Rust`, `Go`, `Javascript` and `Ruby`  don't have any specific page focused on SDK configuration options documented within the doc site that I could find

To me it would make sense to have this live under something like `Java -> SDK` similar to PHP, or `Java -> Configuration`

Reviewer 2: Hey, commenting on that to clarify some confusion: we are currently in the process of removing the navigation of  `<Language> -> Automatic` for **all** languages, we just started with Java: the term "automatic" and "automatic instrumentation" is highly misleading (as this example shows) and we want to reduce that confusion.

So the ".NET" an "Python" thing is going away.

I agree with @jack-berg that this should be a subpage of "Language APIs & SDKs > Java > " directly and not part of zero code instrumentation.

Author: Thanks for the clarification @svrnm, are there any defined patterns I should follow around the new subpage and things like the page name (`SDK` vs `Configuration` vs `SDK Configuration`) to help with consistency?

Reviewer 2: I would suggest `Configuration` since this is a subsection of `Language APIs & **SDKs** > **Java** >`

Here are some quick links into those docs for the configuration options for
specific portions of the SDK & agent:

> - [Batch span processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/tree/main/sdk-extensions/autoconfigure/README.md#batch-span-processor)

Reviewer: You seem to have not brought over certain sections from the SDK. Why include some content here and exclude others? I see the explanation in the PR description:

> I left links out to Batch span processor, Span limits, and Using the SPI to further configure the SDK since I didn't see similar sections in other languages, but let me know if we want all of them ported over and I can do those as well

But this seems wrong. We should document all of the SDK environment variables in one place. If opentelemetry.io is that place, it needs to be complete.

Author: I included everything now

{{% /config_option %}}

## Resources

A resource is the immutable representation of the entity producing the
telemetry. See [Resource semantic conventions](/docs/specs/semconv/resource/)
for more details.

| Environment variable                       | Description                                                                                                |
| ------------------------------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES`                 | Specify resource attributes in the following format: key1=val1,key2=val2,key3=val3                         |
| `OTEL_SERVICE_NAME`                        | Specify logical service name. Takes precedence over `service.name` defined with `otel.resource.attributes` |

> | `OTEL_EXPERIMENTAL_RESOURCE_DISABLED_KEYS` | Specify resource attribute keys that are filtered.                                                         |

Reviewer 3: For consistency, please add a period at the end of each description.

You almost always want to specify the
[`service.name`](/docs/specs/semconv/resource/#service) for your application. It
corresponds to how you describe the application, for example `authservice` could
be an application that authenticates requests. If not specified, SDK defaults
the service name to `unknown_service:java`.

> ### Resource Provider SPI

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### ResourceProvider SPI
```

optionally use an artifact that includes built-in ResourceProviders:

- [io.opentelemetry.instrumentation:opentelemetry-resources](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/tree/main/instrumentation/resources)
  includes providers for a
  [predefined set of common resources](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/tree/main/instrumentation/resources/library/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/instrumentation/resources)
- [io.opentelemetry.contrib:opentelemetry-aws-resources](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-contrib/tree/main/aws-resources)
  includes providers for
  [common AWS resources](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-contrib/tree/main/aws-resources/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/contrib/aws/resource)
- [io.opentelemetry.contrib:opentelemetry-gcp-resources](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-contrib/tree/main/gcp-resources)
  includes providers for
  [common GCP resources](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-contrib/tree/main/gcp-resources/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/contrib/gcp/resource)

> ### Disabling Automatic ResourceProviders

Reviewer 3: Please switch all headings to sentence case unless the word is a proper noun.

> If you are using the `ResourceProvider` SPI (many instrumentation agent
> distributions include this automatically), you can enable / disable one or more
> of them by using the following configuration items:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you are using the `ResourceProvider` SPI, which many instrumentation agent
distributions include automatically, you can turn on or off one or more
of them by using the following configuration items:
```

| Environment variable                    | Description                                                                                 |
| --------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `OTEL_JAVA_ENABLED_RESOURCE_PROVIDERS`  | Enables one or more `ResourceProvider` types. If unset, all resource providers are enabled. |
> | `OTEL_JAVA_DISABLED_RESOURCE_PROVIDERS` | Disables one or more `ResourceProvider` types                                               |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `OTEL_JAVA_ENABLED_RESOURCE_PROVIDERS`  | Turns on one or more `ResourceProvider` types. If unset, all resource providers are enabled. |
| `OTEL_JAVA_DISABLED_RESOURCE_PROVIDERS` | Turns off one or more `ResourceProvider` types                                               |
```

Reviewer 3: https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#disable

> The value for these properties must be a comma separated list of fully qualified
> `ResourceProvider` classnames. For example, if you don't want to expose the name
> of the operating system through the resource, you can pass the following JVM
> argument:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The value for these properties must be a comma-separated list of fully qualified
`ResourceProvider` class names. For example, if you don't want to expose the name
of the operating system through the resource, you can pass the following JVM
argument:
```

`-Dotel.java.disabled.resource.providers=io.opentelemetry.instrumentation.resources.OsResourceProvider`

## Propagators

> The propagators determine which distributed tracing header formats are used, and
> which baggage propagation header formats are used.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The propagators determine which distributed tracing header formats and
baggage propagation header formats are used.
```

| Environment variable | Description                                                                                                               |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `OTEL_PROPAGATORS`   | The propagators to be used. Use a comma-separated list for multiple propagators. Default is `tracecontext,baggage` (W3C). |

Supported values are

- `tracecontext`: [W3C Trace Context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/) (add
  `baggage` as well to include W3C baggage)
- `baggage`: [W3C Baggage](https://www.w3.org/TR/baggage/)
- `b3`: [B3 Single](https://github.com/openzipkin/b3-propagation#single-header)
- `b3multi`:
  [B3 Multi](https://github.com/openzipkin/b3-propagation#multiple-headers)
- `jaeger`:
  [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/1.21/client-libraries/#propagation-format)
  (includes Jaeger baggage)
- `xray`:
  [AWS X-Ray](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/xray/latest/devguide/xray-concepts.html#xray-concepts-tracingheader)
- `ottrace`: [OT Trace](https://github.com/opentracing?q=basic&type=&language=)

## Samplers

> The sampler configures whether spans will be recorded for any call to
> `SpanBuilder.startSpan`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The sampler configures whether spans are recorded for any call to
`SpanBuilder.startSpan`.
```

| Environment variable      | Description                                                             |
| ------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `OTEL_TRACES_SAMPLER`     | The sampler to use for tracing. Defaults to `parentbased_always_on`     |

Reviewer 3: Missing period.

| `OTEL_TRACES_SAMPLER_ARG` | An argument to the configured tracer if supported, for example a ratio. |

> Supported values for `OTEL_TRACES_SAMPLER` are

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Supported values for `OTEL_TRACES_SAMPLER` are the following:
```

- "always_on": AlwaysOnSampler
- "always_off": AlwaysOffSampler
- "traceidratio": TraceIdRatioBased. `OTEL_TRACES_SAMPLER_ARG` sets the ratio.
- "parentbased_always_on": ParentBased(root=AlwaysOnSampler)
- "parentbased_always_off": ParentBased(root=AlwaysOffSampler)
- "parentbased_traceidratio": ParentBased(root=TraceIdRatioBased).

>   `OTEL_TRACES_SAMPLER_ARG` sets the ratio.

Reviewer 3: Inconsistent periods

| `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_DEFAULT_HISTOGRAM_AGGREGATION` | The preferred default histogram aggregation. Options include `BASE2_EXPONENTIAL_BUCKET_HISTOGRAM` and `EXPLICIT_BUCKET_HISTOGRAM`. Default is `EXPLICIT_BUCKET_HISTOGRAM`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| `OTEL_EXPERIMENTAL_EXPORTER_OTLP_RETRY_ENABLED`            | If `true`, enable [experimental retry support](#otlp-exporter-retry). Default is `false`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

To configure the service name for the OTLP exporter, add the `service.name` key

> to the OpenTelemetry Resource, e.g.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to the OpenTelemetry Resource. For example:
```

`OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES=service.name=myservice`.

#### OTLP exporter retry

[OTLP](/docs/specs/otlp/#otlpgrpc-response) requires that
[transient](/docs/specs/otel/protocol/exporter/#retry) errors be handled with a

> retry strategy. When retry is enabled, retryable gRPC status codes will be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
retry strategy. When retry is enabled, retryable gRPC status codes are
```

retried using an exponential backoff with jitter algorithm as described in the
[gRPC Retry Design](https://github.com/grpc/proposal/blob/master/A6-client-retries.md#exponential-backoff).

The policy has the following configuration, which there is currently no way to

> customize.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
customize:
```

- `initialBackoff`: The initial backoff duration. Defaults to `1s`
- `maxBackoff`: The maximum backoff duration. Defaults to `5s`.
- `backoffMultiplier` THe backoff multiplier. Defaults to `1.5`.

### Jaeger exporter

The Jaeger exporters (artifacts `opentelemetry-exporter-jaeger` and
`opentelemetry-exporter-jaeger-thrift`) were removed in the
[1.35.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/releases/tag/v1.35.0)
release (last published in `1.34.0`) and are no longer available in later
versions of autoconfigure.

Jaeger now has [native support for OTLP](/blog/2022/jaeger-native-otlp/), and
users should export to Jaeger using [OTLP](/docs/languages/java/exporters/#otlp)
instead.

### Zipkin exporter

The [Zipkin](https://zipkin.io/zipkin-api/) exporter. It sends JSON in
[Zipkin format](https://zipkin.io/zipkin-api/#/default/post_spans) to a
specified HTTP URL.

| Environment variable            | Description                                                                                                           |
| ------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=zipkin`   | Select the Zipkin exporter                                                                                            |

Reviewer 3: Period missing.

| `OTEL_EXPORTER_ZIPKIN_ENDPOINT` | The Zipkin endpoint to connect to. Default is `http://localhost:9411/api/v2/spans`. Currently only HTTP is supported. |

### Prometheus exporter

The
[Prometheus](https://github.com/prometheus/docs/blob/master/content/docs/instrumenting/exposition_formats.md)
exporter is only available for the metric signal.

| Environment variable               | Description                                                                        |
| ---------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `OTEL_METRICS_EXPORTER=prometheus` | Select the Prometheus exporter                                                     |

Reviewer 3: Missing period.

| `OTEL_EXPORTER_PROMETHEUS_PORT`    | The local port used to bind the prometheus metric server. Default is `9464`.       |
| `OTEL_EXPORTER_PROMETHEUS_HOST`    | The local address used to bind the prometheus metric server. Default is `0.0.0.0`. |

Note that this is a pull exporter - it opens up a server on the local process
listening on the specified host and port, which a Prometheus server scrapes
from.

### Logging exporter

The logging exporter prints the name of the span along with its attributes to
stdout. It's mainly used for testing and debugging.

| Environment variable            | Description                             |
| ------------------------------- | --------------------------------------- |
| `OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=console`  | Select the logging exporter for tracing |
| `OTEL_METRICS_EXPORTER=console` | Select the logging exporter for metrics |

> | `OTEL_LOGS_EXPORTER=console`    | Select the logging exporter for logs    |

Reviewer 3: Ditto. To avoid repeating the comment, please check all descriptions.

The logging exporter is also set when `OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER`,
`OTEL_METRICS_EXPORTER`, or `OTEL_LOGS_EXPORTER` is set to `logging`. `logging`
is a deprecated alias for `console`, the preferred value as
[defined in the specification](/docs/specs/otel/configuration/sdk-environment-variables/#exporter-selection).

### Logging OTLP JSON exporter

The logging-otlp exporter writes the telemetry data to the JUL logger in OTLP
JSON form. It's a more verbose output mainly used for testing and debugging.

| Environment variable                 | Description                                       |
| ------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------- |
| `OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=logging-otlp`  | Select the logging OTLP JSON exporter for tracing |
| `OTEL_METRICS_EXPORTER=logging-otlp` | Select the logging OTLP JSON exporter for metrics |
| `OTEL_LOGS_EXPORTER=logging-otlp`    | Select the logging OTLP JSON exporter for logs    |

**NOTE:** While the `OtlpJsonLogging{Signal}Exporters` are stable, specifying
their use via `OTEL_{signal}_EXPORTER=logging-otlp` is experimental and subject

> to change or removal.

Reviewer 3: Switch to the admonitions format we use in the docs. For example: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/blob/05a7dfa420911704c8a234a1783555e431b5ef50/content/en/ecosystem/integrations.md?plain=1#L29-L41

| --------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER`                        | List of exporters to be used for tracing, separated by commas. Default is `otlp`. `none` means no auto-configured exporter.                                                                              |
| `OTEL_METRICS_EXPORTER`                       | List of exporters to be used for metrics, separated by commas. Default is `otlp`. `none` means no auto-configured exporter.                                                                              |
| `OTEL_LOGS_EXPORTER`                          | List of exporters to be used for logging, separated by commas. Default is `otlp`. `none` means no auto-configured exporter.                                                                              |

> | `OTEL_JAVA_EXPERIMENTAL_EXPORTER_MEMORY_MODE` | If `reusable_data`, enable reusable memory mode (on exporters which support it) to reduce allocations. Default is `immutable_data`. This option is experimental and subject to change or removal.**[1]** |
> 
> **[1]**: NOTE: The exporters which adhere to
> `OTEL_JAVA_EXPERIMENTAL_EXPORTER_MEMORY_MODE=reusable_data` are
> `OtlpGrpcMetricExporter`, `OtlpHttpMetricExporter`, and `PrometheusHttpServer`.
> Support for additional exporters may be added in the future.

Reviewer 4: Here's the updated table row with a markdown footnote:

```suggestion
| `OTEL_JAVA_EXPERIMENTAL_EXPORTER_MEMORY_MODE` | If `reusable_data`, enable reusable memory mode (on exporters which support it) to reduce allocations. Default is `immutable_data`. This option is experimental and subject to change or removal.[^1]    |

[^1]:
    Exporters which adhere to
    `OTEL_JAVA_EXPERIMENTAL_EXPORTER_MEMORY_MODE=reusable_data` are
    `OtlpGrpcMetricExporter`, `OtlpHttpMetricExporter`, and
    `PrometheusHttpServer`. Support for additional exporters may be added in the
    future.
```

{{% /config_option %}}

> ## Resources

Reviewer: All of these should be children under the `## SDK Autoconfiguration section`.

| `OTEL_METRICS_EXPORTER=otlp`                               | Select the OpenTelemetry exporter for metrics (default).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| `OTEL_LOGS_EXPORTER=otlp`                                  | Select the OpenTelemetry exporter for logs (default).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

> | `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT`                              | The OTLP traces, metrics, and logs endpoint to connect to. Must be a URL with a scheme of either `http` or `https` based on the use of TLS. If protocol is `http/protobuf` the version and signal will be appended to the path (e.g. `v1/traces`, `v1/metrics`, or `v1/logs`). Default is `http://localhost:4317` when protocol is `grpc`, and `http://localhost:4318/v1/{signal}` when protocol is `http/protobuf`.                                          |

Reviewer: Could be in a followup PR, but I'd love to combine these signal-specific rows into a single table row per option. As is, its hard to read as is, and could just as easy be described with `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_{SIGNAL}_ENDPOINT` format, where we state the values for `{SIGNAL}` in a footnote or in the description.

Should also state somewhere that signal-specific env vars take priority over the generic version. Again, not something that needs to necessarily be done in this PR since this reflects the state of things right now.

Author: i made this change and added a section in the "General" section explaining the precedence
